Community / Collaborative Review of the Operator Whitepaper (#97)
cncf/sig-app-delivery: operator-wg/whitepaper-community-review/README.md

        * [Operator for GitOps](#operator-for-gitops)
    * [Best Practices](#best-practices)
        * [Management of a single type of application](#management-of-a-single-type-of-application)
        * [Writing operators that represent a whole stack](#writing-operators-that-represent-a-whole-stack)
        * [Multiple CRDs per controller](#multiple-crds-per-controller)
        * [Where to publish and find operators](#where-to-publish-and-find-operators)
        * [Further reading](#further-reading)
    * [Designing Operators](#designing-operators)
        * [Requirement analysis](#requirement-analysis)
        * [Custom or third\-party Operator](#custom-or-third-party-operator)
        * [Use the right tool](#use-the-right-tool)
        * [Use the right programming language](#use-the-right-programming-language)
        * [Design your Operator the right way](#design-your-operator-the-right-way)
        * [References](#references)
    * [Conclusion](#conclusion)
    * [Related Work](#related-work)
    * [Bibliography](#bibliography)
    * [Contributors](#contributors)
        * [Contributors](#contributors-1)
        * [Reviewers](#reviewers)

## Executive Summary

> Maintaining applications or infrastructure requires many repetitive actions and checks. As computers are great in doing repetitive tasks and verifying the state of an object, the preferred way to maintain an application of infrastructure should be through code. An operator provides a way to encapsulate the tasks and checks required to manage other objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maintaining applications or infrastructure requires many repetitive actions and checks. As computers are great at doing repetitive tasks and verifying the state of an object, the preferred way to maintain an application of infrastructure should be through code. An operator provides a way to encapsulate the tasks and checks required to manage other objects.
```

We can solve the problem of managing state with the Operator Pattern.
By leveraging Kubernetes built in capabilities such as self-healing and reconciliation and extending those along with application-specific complexities, it is possible to automate any application's lifecycle and operations and turn it into a highly capable offering.

When we hear about Operators, we think of Kubernetes.
But the idea of an application whose management is entirely automated can be exported to other platforms.
So with this paper, we aim to bring this concept to a higher level than Kubernetes itself.

### Operator Design Pattern
This section describes the pattern with abstract concepts, the next section “Kubernetes Operator Definition” will describe the implementations of the pattern in terms of Kubernetes objects and concepts

The operator design pattern defines how to manage application and infrastructure resources using declarative domain-specific knowledge. The goal of the pattern is to reduce the amount of manual imperative work which is required to keep an application in a healthy and well-maintained state.

> By using the operator pattern, the knowledge on how to adjust and maintain a resource is captured in code and usually in a single service (also called a controller).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using the operator pattern, the knowledge on how to adjust and maintain a resource is captured in code and often within a single service (also called a controller).
```

> When using an operator design pattern the user should only be required to describe the desired state of the application and resources. A software pre-written should make the necessary changes in the world so it will be in the desired state. The software will also monitor the real state continuously and take actions to keep it healthy and n the same state (preventing drifts)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using an operator design pattern the user should only be required to describe the desired state of the application and resources. The operator implementation should make the necessary changes in the world so it will be in the desired state. The operator will also monitor the real state continuously and take actions to keep it healthy and in the same state (preventing drifts).
````

A general diagram of an operator will have software that can read the desired spec and can create and manage the resources that were described. 

![Operator Design Pattern](img/02_1_operator_pattern.png)

The Operator pattern consists of three components:

* The application or infrastructure that we want to manage in a declarative way.
* Our domain specific knowledge that describes the state of the application in a declarative way.
* A controller that run continuously:
  * Reads and is aware of the state.
  * Runs actions against the application in an automated way.
  * Report the state of the application  in a declarative way.

This design pattern will be applied on Kubernetes and its operators in the next sections.

### Operator Characteristics

> The core purpose of any operator is to extend its orchestrator's underlying API with new domain knowledge. As an example, an orchestration platform as Kubernetes natively understands things like containers and layer 4 load balancers via the Pod and Service objects. An operator adds new capabilities for more complex systems and applications. For instance, a prometheus-operator introduces new object types, "Prometheus", which extend Kubernetes with high-level support for deploying and running Prometheus servers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The core purpose of any operator is to extend its orchestrator's underlying API with new domain knowledge. As an example, an orchestration platform within Kubernetes natively understands things like containers and layer 4 load balancers via the Pod and Service objects. An operator adds new capabilities for more complex systems and applications. For instance, a prometheus-operator introduces new object types _Prometheus_, extending Kubernetes with high-level support for deploying and running Prometheus servers.
```

> The capabilities provided by an operator can be sorted into three overarching categories: dynamic configuration, operational automation, and domain knowledge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The capabilities provided by an operator can be sorted into three overarching categories: dynamic configuration, operational automation and domain knowledge.
```

#### Dynamic Configuration

> Since the dawn of time, there have been two main ways to configure software, configuration files and environment variables. In the cloud native world there are some newer options like querying a well-known API at startup, but most existing software in the world uses one or both of these options. Kubernetes naturally provides many tools to interact with these (ConfigMaps, Secrets, etc) but because they are generic, they don’t understand any specifics of configuring a given application. An operator can define new custom object types (custom resources) to better express the configuration of a particular application in a Kubernetes context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the dawn of time, there have been two main ways to configure software, configuration files and environment variables. In the cloud-native world, there are some newer options like querying a well-known API at startup, but most existing software in the world uses one or both of these options. Kubernetes naturally provides many tools to interact with these (such as ConfigMaps and Secrets) but because they are generic, they don’t understand any specifics of configuring a given application. An operator can define new custom object types (custom resources) to better express the configuration of a particular application in a Kubernetes context.
```

> This allows for better validation and data structuring, which in turn reduces the likelihood of small configuration errors and improves the ability of teams to self-service without having as deep or complete a knowledge of either the underlying orchestrator or the target application as would be traditionally required. This can include things like progressive defaults, where a few high level settings are used to populate a best-practices-driven configuration file, or adaptive configuration such as adjusting resource usage to match available hardware or expected load based on cluster size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Allowing for better validation and data structuring reduces the likelihood of small configuration errors and improves the ability of teams to self-serve. Enabling them to avoid having a deep or complete a knowledge of either the underlying orchestrator or the target application as would be traditionally required. This can include things like progressive defaults, where a few high-level settings are used to populate a best-practices-driven configuration file or adaptive configuration such as adjusting resource usage to match available hardware or expected load based on cluster size.
````

#### Operational Automation
Along with custom resources, most operators include at least one custom controller. These controllers are daemons that run inside the orchestrator like any other, but connect to the underlying API and provide automation of common or repetitive tasks. This is the same way that orchestrators (like Kubernetes) are implemented, you may have seen kube-controller-manager or cloud-controller-manager mentioned in your journey so far. But as we saw with configuration, operators can extend and enhance orchestrators with higher-level automation such as deploying clustered software, providing automated backups and restores, or dynamic scaling based on load.

> By putting these common operational tasks into code, we can ensure it will be repeatable, testable, and upgradable in a standardized fashion. Keeping humans out of the loop on frequent tasks also ensures that steps won’t be missed or elided, and that different pieces of the task can’t drift out of sync with each other. As before, this allows for improved team autonomy by reducing the hours spent on boring-but-important upkeep tasks like application backups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By putting these common operational tasks into code, we can ensure they will be repeatable, testable and upgradable in a standardized fashion. Keeping humans out of the loop on frequent tasks also ensures that steps won’t be missed or excluded and that different pieces of the task can’t drift out of sync with each other. As before, this allows for improved team autonomy by reducing the hours spent on boring-but-important upkeep tasks like application backups.
```

#### Domain Knowledge

> Similar to operational automation, we can write an operator to encode specialized domain knowledge about particular software or processes. A common example of this is application upgrades. While a simple stateless application might need nothing more than a Deployment’s rolling upgrade, databases and other stateful applications often require very specific steps in sequence to safely perform upgrades. This can be handled autonomously by the operator as it knows your current and requested versions and can run specialized upgrade code when needed. More generally, this can apply to anything a pre-cloud-native environment would use manual checklists for, effectively using the operator as an executable runbook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to operational automation, we can write an operator to encode specialized domain knowledge about particular software or processes. A common example of this is application upgrades. While a simple stateless application might need nothing more than a Deployment’s rolling upgrade; databases and other stateful applications often require very specific steps in sequence to safely perform upgrades. This can be handled autonomously by the operator as it knows your current and requested versions and can run specialized upgrade code when needed. More generally, this can apply to anything a pre-cloud-native environment would use manual checklists for (effectively using the operator as an executable runbook).
```

> Another common place to take advantage of automated domain knowledge is error remediation. For example, Kubernetes built in remediation behaviors mostly start and end with “restart container until it works” which is a powerful solution but often not the best or fastest solution. An operator can monitor its application and react to errors with specific behavior to resolve the error or escalate the issue if it can’t be automatically resolved. This can reduce MTTR (mean time to recovery) and also reduce operator fatigue from recurring issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another common way to take advantage of automated domain knowledge is error remediation. For example, the Kubernetes built-in remediation behaviours mostly start and end with “restart container until it works” which is a powerful solution but often not the best or fastest solution. 
An operator can monitor its application and react to errors with specific behaviour to resolve the error or escalate the issue if it can’t be automatically resolved. This can reduce MTTR (mean time to recovery) and also reduce operator fatigue from recurring issues.
```

### Operator components in Kubernetes

*“An operator is a Kubernetes controller that understands 2 domains: Kubernetes and something else. By combining knowledge of both domains, it can automate tasks that usually require a human operator that understands both domains”*
(Jimmy Zelinskie, https://github.com/kubeflow/tf-operator/issues/300#issuecomment-357527937)

![Operator Big Picture](img/02_2_operator.png)

> Operators enable to extend the Kubernetes API with operational knowledge. This is achieved by combining Kubernetes controllers and watched objects that describe the desired state. The controller can watch one or more objects and the objects can be either Kubernetes primitives as Deployments and Services or things which reside outside of the cluster as Virtual Machines or Databases. The controller will constantly compare the desired state with the current state using the reconciliation loop which ensures that the watched objects get transitioned to the desired state in a defined way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operators enable the extension of the Kubernetes API with operational knowledge. 
This is achieved by combining Kubernetes controllers and watched objects that describe the desired state. The controller can watch one or more objects and the objects can be either Kubernetes primitives such as Deployments, Services or things that reside outside of the cluster such as Virtual Machines or Databases. 

The controller will constantly compare the desired state with the current state using the reconciliation loop which ensures that the watched objects get transitioned to the desired state in a defined way.
````

The operational (or domain-specific) knowledge is usually encapsulated in one or more Kubernetes custom resources which are defined by custom resource definitions.

#### Kubernetes controllers
A Kubernetes Controller takes care of routine tasks to ensure the desired state expressed by a particular resource type matches the real-world state (current state,https://engineering.bitnami.com/articles/a-deep-dive-into-kubernetes-controllers.html, https://fntlnz.wtf/post/what-i-learnt-about-kubernetes-controller/). For instance, the Deployment controller takes care that the desired amount of pod replicas is running and a new pod spins up, when one pod is deleted or fails.

> Technically, there is no difference between a typical controller and an operator. Often, the difference referred to is the operational knowledge which is included in the operator. As a result, a controller which spins up a pod when a custom resource is created and the pod gets destroyed afterwards can be described as a simple controller. If the controller has additional operational knowledge like how to upgrade or remediate from errors, it is an operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Technically, there is no difference between a typical controller and an operator. Often the difference referred to is the operational knowledge that is included in the operator. As a result, a controller which spins up a pod when a custom resource is created and the pod gets destroyed afterwards can be described as a simple controller. If the controller has additional operational knowledge like how to upgrade or remediate from errors, it is an operator.
```

#### Custom resources and custom resource definitions

> Custom resources are used to store and retrieve structured data in Kubernetes (https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/). In case of an operator, a custom resource contains the required state of the application- or domain specific knowledge, but does not contain the implementation logic . Such information could be the version information of application components, but also enabled features of an application or information where backups of the application could be part of this. A custom resource definition (CRD) defines how such an object looks like, for example which fields exist and how the CRD is named. Such an CRD can be scaffolded using tools (as the operator sdk) or be written by hand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom resources are used to store and retrieve structured data in Kubernetes (https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/). 
In the case of an operator, a custom resource contains the required state of the application or domain-specific knowledge but does not contain the implementation logic. Such information could be the version information of application components, but also enabled features of an application or information where backups of the application could be part of this. A custom resource definition (CRD) defines how such an object looks like, for example, which fields exist and how the CRD is named. Such a CRD can be scaffolded using tools (as the operator SDK) or be written by hand.
```

The following sections should give an overview about capabilities an operator could have and what a user can expect if an operator implements these capabilities.

#### Install an application / take ownership of an application
An operator should be able to provision and set up all the required resources, so no manual work would be required during the installation. An operator must check and verify that resources that were provisions are working as expected, and ready to be used.

An operator should also be able to recognize resources that were provintied before the installation process, and only take ownership of them for later use. In this case, the ownership process should be seamless and not cause downtime. The ownership process purpose is to enable easy migration of resources to the operator.

An Operator should report the version of the resources and their health status during the process.

#### Upgrade an application

> An operator should be able to upgrade the version of the application / resources. The operator should know how to update the required dependencies, and run custom commands, for example, run database migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An operator should be able to upgrade the version of the application/resources. The operator should know how to update the required dependencies and executing custom commands such as running a database migration.
```

> An operator should monitor the update, and rollback if there was a problem during the process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An operator should monitor the update and rollback if there was a problem during the process.
```

An operator should report the version of the resources and their health status during the process. If there was an error, the version reported should be the version that is currently been used.

#### Backup

This capability is for operators that manage data and ensure that the operator is able to create consistent backups. This backup should be done in a way that the user of the operator can be certain that it can be restored if data is lost or compromised. Furthermore, the status information provided should give insights about when the backup last ran and where it is located.

![Example Backup Process](plantuml/backup-sequence.png)

> The above illustration shows how such a process could look like. At first the backup gets triggered either by a human or another trigger (e.g. time-trigger). The operator instructs its watched resource (application) to set up a consistent state (like a consistent snapshot). Afterwards, the data of the application gets backed up to an external storage using appropriate tools. This could either be a one-step process (backup directly to external storage) or in multiple steps, like writing to a persistent volume at first and to the external storage afterwards. The external storage might be a NFS/CIFS share (or any other network file system) on-premises, but also an object store/bucket on a cloud provider infrastructure. Whether the backup failed or succeeded, the state (of the backup) including the backed up application version and the location of the backup might be written to the state section of the custom resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above illustration shows how such a process could look like. At first, the backup gets triggered either by a human or another trigger (e.g. time-trigger). The operator instructs its watched resource (application) to set up a consistent state (like a consistent snapshot). Afterwards, the data of the application gets backed up to external storage using appropriate tools. This could either be a one-step process (backup directly to external storage) or in multiple steps, like writing to a persistent volume at first and to the external storage afterwards. The external storage might be an NFS/CIFS share (or any other network file system) on-premises, but also an object store/bucket on a cloud provider infrastructure. Whether the backup failed or succeeded, the state (of the backup) including the backed-up application version and the location of the backup might be written to the state section of the custom resource.
```

#### Recovery from backup

The recovery capability of an operator might assist a user in restoring the application state from a successful backup. Therefore, the application state (application version and data) should be restored. 

> There might be many ways to achieve this. One possible way could be that the current application state also got backed up (including configuration), so the user only has to create a custom resource for the application and point to the backup. The operator would read the configuration, restore the application version and restore the data. Another possible solution might be that the user only backed up the data and might have to specify the application version used. Nevertheless, in both ways the operator ensures that the application is up and running afterwards using the data from the backup specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There might be many ways to achieve this. One possible way could be that the current application state also gets backed up (including configuration), so the user only has to create a custom resource for the application and point to the backup. The operator would read the configuration, restore the application version and restore the data. Another possible solution might be that the user only backed up the data and might have to specify the application version used. Nevertheless, in both ways, the operator ensures that the application is up and running afterwards using the data from the backup specified.
```

#### Auto-Remediation

> The auto-remediation capability of an operator should ensure that it is able to restore the application from a more complex failed state, which might not be handled or detected by mechanisms as health checks (live- and readiness probes). Therefore, the operator needs to have a deep understanding of the application. This can be achieved by metrics which might indicate application failures or errors, but also by dealing with kubernetes mechanisms like health checks. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The auto-remediation capability of an operator should ensure that it is able to restore the application from a more complex failed state, which might not be handled or detected by mechanisms as health checks (live and readiness probes). Therefore, the operator needs to have a deep understanding of the application. This can be achieved by metrics that might indicate application failures or errors, but also by dealing with kubernetes mechanisms like health checks.
```

Some examples might be:
* Rolling back to the last known configuration if a defined amount of pod starts is unsuccessful after a version change.

> * In some points a restart of the application might be a short-term solution which also could be done by the operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some points a restart of the application might be a short-term solution which also could be done by the operator.
```

* It could also be imaginable that an operator informs another operator of a dependent service that a backend system is not reachable at the moment (to take remediation actions).

> In any ways, this capability enables the operator to take actions to keep the system up and running. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In any situation, this capability enables the operator to take actions to keep the system up and running.
```

While the managed application should provide the telemetry data for itself, the operator could provide metrics about its own behavior and only provides a high level overview about the applications state (as it would be possible for auto-remediation). Furthermore, typical telemetry data provided by the operator could be the count of remediation actions, duration of backups, but also information about the last errors or operational tasks which were handled.

#### Scaling (Operator Supports Scaling)
Scaling is part of the day-2 operations that an operator can manage in order to keep the application / resources functional. The scaling capability doesn’t require the scaling to be automated, but only that the operator will know how to change the resources in terms of horizontal and vertical scaling.

An operator should be able to increase or decrease any resource that it owns, such as CPU, memory, disk size and number of instances.

Ideally the scaling action will be without a downtime. Scaling action ends when all the resources are in consistent state and ready to be used, so an operator should verify the state of all the resources and report it.

#### Auto-Scaling

> An operator should be able to perform the scaling capability based on metrics that it collects constantly and according to thresholds. An operator should be able to automatically increase and decrease every resource that it’s own

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An operator should be able to perform the scaling capability based on metrics that it collects constantly and according to thresholds. An operator should be able to automatically increase and decrease every resource that it’s own.
```

An operator should respect basic scaling configuration of min and max.

#### Auto-configuration tuning
This capability should empower the operator to manage the configuration of the managed application. As an example, the operator could adopt memory settings of an application according to the operation environment (e.g. kubernetes) or the change of DNS names. Furthermore, the operator should be able to handle configuration changes in a seamless way, e.g. if a configuration change requires a restart, this should be triggered. 

> These capabilities should be transparent to the users the user should have the possibility to override such auto-configuration mechanisms if he wants to do so. Furthermore, automatic reconfigurations should be well-documented in a way that the user could comprehend what is happening on the infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These capabilities should be transparent to the users the user should have the possibility to override such auto-configuration mechanisms if they want to do so. Furthermore, automatic reconfigurations should be well-documented in a way that the user could comprehend what is happening on the infrastructure.
```

All of these routes offer potential to compromise the operator and
its resources, and should be protected in line with best practices
laid out below.

### Operator Developer
Operator developers should be aware of the security risks an operator
introduces and document its secure use. While developing an operator
it's important to focus on key areas such as transparency and
documentation, operator scope, and vulnerability analysis.

#### Transparency and Documentation
During development of an operator you should have a clear understanding
of how it will work and interface within Kubernetes. You should
provide your users with some or all of this list:

* Descriptive diagram (threat model) of how the operator is
communicating and with what is a good start to helping a user
understand how they must secure it and apply policy for the operator.
* Use case of how the software is intended to be used in order to
stay in scope of compliance or you risk vulnerability outside that
scope.
* Documented RBAC scopes, threat model, communication ports, API
calls available

#### Operator Scope
(to be completed)

#### Vulnerability Analysis
(to be completed)

### Application Developer ("users")

> Operators perform  administrative tasks on the user’s behalf such
> as volume creation and attachment, application deployment, and
> certificate management. As the user is delegating control to the
> operator it is essential to provide machine authorization to perform
> the actions needed, but one must also be careful to not grant more
> privileges than are necessary for the operator to perform its role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operators perform administrative tasks on the user’s behalf such
as volume creation/attachment, application deployment, and
certificate management. As the user is delegating control to the
operator, it is essential to provide machine authorization to perform
the actions needed, but one must also be careful to not grant more
privileges than are necessary for the operator to perform its role.
```

separation from any loose or stolen RBAC in the subordinate resource’s
namespace, a dedicated namespace for the operator provides more
separation.

**Role-Based Access Controls** are available in modern releases of
Kubernetes. When granting an operator access to resources, the focus
should be on granting the most limited set of permissions needed
for the operator to perform its task. This means only grant
ClusterRoles if absolutely necessary, but granting specific permissions
for specific resources/namespaces. The 
[Using RBAC Authorization](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/)
chapter of the user guide covers this topic in detail. Operator
build kits such as the Operator SDK use general RBAC defaults that
developers may have not refined for their specific operator.
Permissions afforded by the service account identity outside the
cluster include federated and cross-cluster operators that have
permissions in other Kubernetes clusters. As operators are increasingly
used to manage off-cluster and cloud resources, cloud IAM integration
permissions should be configured to prevent cloud account takeover
from a compromised operator.

> One thing to note: A “land grab” of privileges - eg requesting
> significant/administrative access - is not always malicious in
> intent. The developer might not know better, or have had the time
> to tune the required permissions to the concept of least privilege.
> Even in the most innocent case, though, it is still a red flag:
> Perhaps the operator is not yet widely used enough for others to
> have encountered the overuse of privileges, and perhaps it is a
> sign of other security weaknesses within the operator. It is advisable
> to proceed with caution if such a “land grab” is found.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One thing to note: A “land grab” of privileges - e.g requesting
significant/administrative access - is not always malicious in
intent. The developer might not know better or have had the time
to tune the required permissions to the concept of least privilege.
Even in the most innocent case, though, it is still a red flag:
Perhaps the operator is not yet widely used enough for others to
have encountered the overuse of privileges, and perhaps it is a
sign of other security weaknesses within the operator. It is advisable
to proceed with caution if such a “land grab” is found.
```

a new project, abandoned software which is no longer receiving
security updates, or indicators of an unofficial repository with
malicious intent.
* What privileges does the script attempt to gain? Does the script
attempt to run container securityContexts with host sharing or
“privileged mode”?

**Advanced security controls**, such as SELinux, AppArmor, or seccomp
may be mandated by cluster policy. Open source operators are unlikely
to have configurations for these Linux security modules, but if
your organization is familiar with one of these control systems,
writing the appropriate security configuration for the operator
should not require significant overhead.

**Operator configuration**: Ideally a project will be “secure by
default” to increase the likelihood of a secure operator or application
deployment. Insecure defaults require manual configuration to secure
your environment. While it may seem like unnecessary work to learn
configuration  parameters of a new operator, it is usually preferable
manually adjusting the configuration and/or source code of an
operator itself to reach the needed level of security.

## Operator Frameworks for Kubernetes

> Currently, a lot of frameworks exist to simplify the process of bootstrapping an operator/controller project and to write operators. This chapter describes some of them without any claim to comprehensiveness.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, many frameworks exist to simplify the process of bootstrapping an operator/controller project and to write operators. This chapter describes some of them without any claim to comprehensiveness.
```

Additional examples and ideas what could be implemented using metacontroller, can be found at the [metacontroller-examples](https://metacontroller.github.io/metacontroller/examples.html) page !

For any question, please visit our slack channel ([#metacontroller](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CA0SUPUDP)) or ask it on [github discussions](https://github.com/metacontroller/metacontroller/discussions/).

## Operator Lifecycle Management
An operator is an application, this section will describe considerations regarding the lifecycle of the operator itself. 

### Upgrading the Operator
While upgrading the operator, special care should be taken in regards to the managed resources. During an operator upgrade, the managed resources should be kept in the same state and healthy. 

### Upgrading the Declarative State
the declarative state is the API of the operator, and it may need to be upgraded. The usage of CRD versions indicates the stability of the CRD and the operator - [read more about versioning a CRD](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definition-versioning/)

## Use Cases for an Operator
Example:

> An operator is used to install an application, or to provision another object which is achieved by defining a set of objects which are managed by the operator and how they work with each other. After the installation, the target application should be running without human interaction. In further consequence a controller is used for reconfiguration of a system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An operator is used to install an application, or to provision another object which is achieved by defining a set of objects which are managed by the operator and how they work with each other. After the installation, the target application should be running without human interaction. In further consequence, a controller is used for the reconfiguration of a system.
```

> To achieve this, an operator watches the current state and the definitions made in the custom resource or external events, compares them and starts reconciling the application to get to the desired state when it’s needed. Changes in the custom resource could be enabling a feature or changing a version, external events could be the availability of an application update reported by an api. The current state of the application could also differ, when objects managed by the operator get deleted and so they also get recreated to get to the desired state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve this, an operator watches the current state and the definitions made in the custom resource or external events. Comparing them and starting to reconcile the application to get to the desired state when it is needed. Changes in the custom resource could be enabling a feature or changing a version, external events could be the availability of an application update reported by an API. The current state of the application could also differ when objects managed by the operator get deleted and so they also get recreated to get to the desired state.
```

> When updating an application, the operator contains the logic which is needed to get to the new application version and how to transition. As described in the last chapter, this could be mechanisms to backup data before updating and updating the database schema. Therefore, the logic included in the operator knows which prerequisites are necessary to build a consistent backup, how to backup the data and how to get back to the normal state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When updating an application, the operator contains the logic which is needed to get to the new application version and how to transition. As described in the last chapter, these could be mechanisms to backup data before updating and updating the database schema. Therefore, the logic included in the operator knows which prerequisites are necessary to build a consistent backup, how to backup the data and how to get back to the normal state.
```

### Further reading
There are lots of more best practices like:
* An operator shouldn't install other operators
* Operators shouldn't make assumptions about the namespaces they are deployed in, but also
* Use an SDK for writing operators

and many other best practices might be found on the internet. More of them could be found on following sources:
* https://github.com/operator-framework/community-operators/blob/master/docs/best-practices.md
* https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/containers-kubernetes/best-practices-for-building-kubernetes-operators-and-stateful-apps
    
## Designing Operators

The previous chapter describes a use case for an operator that was one of the first operators ever. With no claim
of completeness, this chapter deals with some best practice when writing
own Operators, based on our own experience or described by the
community. However, without clear knowledge of the actual state and
without clear ideas of what we want to achieve, we also need some
methods and techniques specifying what our Operator should do.
Therefore, we will also have to deal with some aspects of requirement
engineering.

### Requirement analysis

> A key promise of Kubernetes is that it enables automation of operational

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A key promise of Kubernetes is that it enables the automation of operational
```

tasks to deploy, scale, and manage containerized applications across
multiple environments with no (or minimal) human intervention. In
Kubernetes, stateless cloud-native applications are well suited for
horizontal scaling, automated self-healing restarts, or progressive
rollout of new containers. However, stateful applications with complex
components running in clustered or distributed environments are not
always well suited for this type of container-based infrastructure. They
still require human interaction when it comes to persistence, upgrades,
or high availability to remain in a stable state.

> True, Kubernetes solves these issues in a novel way by creating and
> managing custom applications using Operators. However, and here is the
> first question: as a developer, do you really know how this type of
> application works and interacts both internally and externally? How does
> the day-to-day IT operations work. How is the application backed up
> (including recovery). What steps are necessary in case of failovers or
> outages, are there any dependencies between the software components?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
True, Kubernetes solves these issues in a novel way by creating and
managing custom applications using Operators. However, and here is the
first question: as a developer, do you really know how this type of
application works and interacts both internally and externally? How do
the day-to-day IT operations work? How is the application backed up
(including recovery)? What steps are necessary in case of failovers or
outages, are there any dependencies between the software components?
```

It is therefore strongly recommended that a comprehensive requirement
analysis is needed to determine the requirements or conditions of an
Operator. Requirement analysis is critical to the success or failure of
Operators. All requirements should be documented, measurable, testable,
traceable, related to identified requirements, and defined at a level of
detail sufficient for system design.

Best practice:

1.  Do not assume to know what is needed.

2.  Study existing documentation of your application, interview
    responsible system administrators and other stakeholders (if
    necessary), get a list of possible system check activities, Business

>     and SLA-relevant KPI\'s and compare them with existing incident

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    and SLA-relevant KPI and compare them with existing incident
```

    a suite of tooling to ease development and testing. \[3\]

-   Design an Operator in such a way that application instance continues
    to run unaffected and effectively even if the Operator is stopped or
    removed.

-   Develop one Operator per application \[4\]

-   Operators should be backward compatible and always understand
    previous versions of resources that have already been created.

-   Use asynchronous sync loops \[4\]

-   Operators should leverage built-in Kubernetes primitives such as
    replica sets and services. Whenever possible, use well-understood
    and well-tested code.

-   When possible, test Operators against a test suite that simulates
    potential failures of Pods, configuration, storage, and networking.

### References

\[1\] https://operatorhub.io

\[2\]
https://hazelcast.org/blog/build-your-kubernetes-operator-with-the-right-tool/

\[3\]
https://github.com/operator-framework/community-operators/blob/master/docs/best-practices.md

\[4\]
https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/containers-kubernetes/best-practices-for-building-kubernetes-operators-and-stateful-apps

## Conclusion

> Originally, operators were a first class solution for onboarding stateful applications into orchestrators that usually tackled the operation of stateless workloads. They enhanced their APIs and increased the power of container orchestrators further but didn’t resolve all problems of application configuration and “Day 2” operations. It is important to keep in mind that Operators are a pattern to manage specific requirements and facilitate operations but they also bring complexities that should be weighed up before being implemented.**Status**: WIP | **Maintainer** : N/A | 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Originally, operators were a first-class solution for onboarding stateful applications into orchestrators that usually tackled the operation of stateless workloads. They enhanced their APIs and increased the power of container orchestrators further but didn’t resolve all problems of application configuration and “Day 2” operations. It is important to keep in mind that Operators are a pattern to manage specific requirements and facilitate operations but they also bring complexities that should be weighed up before being implemented.**Status**: WIP | **Maintainer** : N/A |
```

## Bibliography

* Dobies, J., & Wood, J. (2020). Kubernetes Operators. O'Reilly.
* Ibryam, B. (2019). Kubernetes Patterns. O'Reilly.
* Operator Framework. (n.d.). Operator Capabilities. Operator Framework. Retrieved 11 2020, 24, from https://operatorframework.io/operator-capabilities/
* Philips, B. (2016, 03 16). Introducing Operators: Putting Operational Knowledge into Software. CoreOS Blog. Retrieved 11 24, 2020, from https://coreos.com/blog/introducing-operators.html
## Contributors

### Contributors
- Philippe Martin (github.com/feloy)
- Noah Kantrowitz (github.com/coderanger)
- John Kinsella (github.com/jlk)
- Roland Pellegrini (github.com/friendlydevops)

- Jennifer Strejevitch (github.com/Jenniferstrej)
- Omer Kahani (github.com/OmerKahani)
- Thomas Schuetz (github.com/thschue)

### Reviewers

> **Add yourself if you reviewed the document**

Reviewer: Alex Jones (github.com/AlexsJones) , if you want to add me.

## Foundation
Kubernetes and the success of other orchestrators, has been due to their focus on the main capabilities of containers.
While companies began their journey to cloud native, working with more specific use cases (microservices, stateless applications) made more sense.
As Kubernetes and other container orchestrators grew their reputation and extensibility, requirements became more ambitious.
The desire to use the full lifecycle capabilities of an orchestrator was also transferred to highly distributed data stores.

Kubernetes primitives were not built to manage state by default.
Relying on Kubernetes primitives alone brings difficulty managing stateful application requirements such as replication, failover automation, backup/restore and upgrades (_which can occur based on events that are too specific_).

Operator Pattern can be used to solve the problem of managing state.
By leveraging Kubernetes built-in capabilities such as self-healing, reconciliation and extending those along with application-specific complexities; it is possible to automate any application lifecycle, operations and turn it into a highly capable offering.

> Operators are thought of a synonymous with Kubernetes.

Reviewer 2: Operators are thought of **as** synonymous with Kubernetes.

For example, if below `Statefulset` will be deployed:
```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: StatefulSet
metadata:
  annotations:
    service: "statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-name"
    ports: "80:8080"
...
```
given `Service` object will be created by metacontroller:
```yaml
apiVersion: "v1"
kind: "Service"
spec:
  selector: "statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-name"
  ports:
  - port: 80
    targetPort: 8080
```

The user defined endpoint (in this example - `http://service-per-pod.metacontroller/sync-service-per-pod`) only needs to care about the calculation of the `Service` and how it should look like for a given `StatefulSet`.

Additional examples and ideas what could be implemented using metacontroller, can be found at the [metacontroller-examples](https://metacontroller.github.io/metacontroller/examples.html) page !

For any question, please visit our slack channel ([#metacontroller](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CA0SUPUDP)) or ask it on [github discussions](https://github.com/metacontroller/metacontroller/discussions/).

> 

Reviewer 2: As a Python alternative to the normal Golang-based operator frameworks is given, it might be nice to show some love to https://github.com/flant/shell-operator - it makes operator building much more accessible to more Devops/Sysadmin type folks rather than developers.

Author: Feel free to add it, if you like ... I think this would add some value to the paper as it illustrates that operators could also be written in bash :-)

## Introduction

This white paper defines Operators in a wider context than Kubernetes. It describes their characteristics and components, gives an overview of common patterns currently in use and explains how they differ from Kubernetes controllers.

It also dives deep into their capabilities such as backup, recovery and automatic configuration tuning, gives insight into frameworks currently in use, lifecycle management, security risks and use cases.

This paper includes best practices including observability and security, technical implementation and CNCF maintained code samples.

It closes with related work, what additional value they can bring beyond this white paper and the next steps for Operators.

### The goal of this document
The goal of this document is to provide a definition of operators for cloud-native applications in the context of Kubernetes and other container orchestrators.

### Target Audience / Minimum Level of Experience 

> This document is intended for application developers, Kubernetes cluster operators and service providers (internal or external) - who are looking to learn about operators and the problems they can solve. It can also help teams already looking at operators to learn when and where to use them to best effect. It presumes basic Kubernetes knowledge such as familiarity with Pods and Deployments.

Reviewer 3: ~~are looking~~ want

> This document is intended for application developers, Kubernetes cluster operators and service providers (internal or external) - who are looking to learn about operators and the problems they can solve. It can also help teams already looking at operators to learn when and where to use them to best effect. It presumes basic Kubernetes knowledge such as familiarity with Pods and Deployments.

Author: ```suggestion
This document is intended for application developers, Kubernetes cluster operators and service providers (internal or external) - who want to learn about operators and the problems they can solve. It can also help teams already looking at operators to learn when and where to use them to best effect. It presumes basic Kubernetes knowledge such as familiarity with Pods and Deployments.
```

## Foundation
Kubernetes and the success of other orchestrators, has been due to their focus on the main capabilities of containers.
While companies began their journey to cloud native, working with more specific use cases (microservices, stateless applications) made more sense.
As Kubernetes and other container orchestrators grew their reputation and extensibility, requirements became more ambitious.
The desire to use the full lifecycle capabilities of an orchestrator was also transferred to highly distributed data stores.

Kubernetes primitives were not built to manage state by default.
Relying on Kubernetes primitives alone brings difficulty managing stateful application requirements such as replication, failover automation, backup/restore and upgrades (_which can occur based on events that are too specific_).

> We can solve the problem of managing state with the Operator Pattern.
> By leveraging Kubernetes built-in capabilities such as self-healing, reconciliation and extending those along with application-specific complexities; it is possible to automate any application lifecycle, operations and turn it into a highly capable offering.
> 
> When we hear about Operators, we think of Kubernetes.
> But the idea of an application whose management is entirely automated can be exported to other platforms.
> So with this paper, we aim to bring this concept to a higher level than Kubernetes itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operator Pattern can be used to solve the problem of managing state.
By leveraging Kubernetes built-in capabilities such as self-healing, reconciliation and extending those along with application-specific complexities; it is possible to automate any application lifecycle, operations and turn it into a highly capable offering.

Operators are thought of a synonymous with Kubernetes.
However, the idea of an application whose management is entirely automated can be exported to other platforms.
The aim of this paper is to bring this concept to a higher level than Kubernetes itself.
```

Remove first-person voice

### Operator Design Pattern
This section describes the pattern with high-level concepts.
The next section _Kubernetes Operator Definition_ will describe the implementations of the pattern in terms of Kubernetes objects and concepts.

> The operator design pattern defines how to manage application and infrastructure resources using declarative domain-specific knowledge. The goal of the pattern is to reduce the amount of manual imperative work which is required to keep an application in a healthy and well-maintained state.

Reviewer 4: Dropping "declarative" would suggest that the knowledge could be captured in a series of commands that the controller will run. Was that what you intended to achieve?

> The operator design pattern defines how to manage application and infrastructure resources using declarative domain-specific knowledge. The goal of the pattern is to reduce the amount of manual imperative work which is required to keep an application in a healthy and well-maintained state.

Reviewer 5: Domain-specific knowledge is things like how to deploy, upgrade, scale, backup, restore, repair, remediate, refresh, warm, re-index, re-balance, etc. That knowledge gets written as code to automate those tasks. But there's nothing declarative about the knowledge itself, or really even the automation.

The declarative part is when a user says "I want app X to be running" using a declarative API. Then a controller compares actual state to desired state, and it executes the various automated tasks as appropriate to make reality match desired state.

So the API is declarative, and the controller is the implementation of the declarative API. The automated domain-specific knowledge is typically 90% a bunch of imperative tasks that the controller invokes at the right times, and 10% the controller knowing when to invoke them.

I agree completely that "the knowledge could be captured in a series of commands". Often an operator will even use existing libraries that already implement the domain-specific logic (talk to a cloud API, interact with a DB, interact with k8s APIs, ...), and that behavior could absolutely be delivered in an imperative or declarative way.

> The operator design pattern defines how to manage application and infrastructure resources using declarative domain-specific knowledge. The goal of the pattern is to reduce the amount of manual imperative work which is required to keep an application in a healthy and well-maintained state.

Reviewer 4: I like the clear separation you described, we should capture it in the whitepaper. 

Maybe we should change the `declarative domain-specific knowledge` to `declarative state`. I still think that the declarative API is an important part of the pattern, what do you think?

> The operator design pattern defines how to manage application and infrastructure resources using declarative domain-specific knowledge. The goal of the pattern is to reduce the amount of manual imperative work which is required to keep an application in a healthy and well-maintained state.

Author: Will be handled in #99

> The operator design pattern defines how to manage application and infrastructure resources using declarative domain-specific knowledge. The goal of the pattern is to reduce the amount of manual imperative work which is required to keep an application in a healthy and well-maintained state.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The operator design pattern defines how to manage application and infrastructure resources using domain-specific knowledge and declarative state. The goal of the pattern is to reduce the amount of manual imperative work (how to backup, scale, upgrade...) which is required to keep an application in a healthy and well-maintained state, by capturing that domain specific knowledge in code and exposing it using a declarative API
```

> The operator design pattern defines how to manage application and infrastructure resources using declarative domain-specific knowledge. The goal of the pattern is to reduce the amount of manual imperative work which is required to keep an application in a healthy and well-maintained state.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The operator design pattern defines how to manage application and infrastructure resources using domain-specific knowledge and declarative state. The goal of the pattern is to reduce the amount of manual imperative work (how to backup, scale, upgrade...) which is required to keep an application in a healthy and well-maintained state, by capturing that domain specific knowledge in code and exposing it using a declarative API
```

By using the operator pattern, the knowledge on how to adjust and maintain a resource is captured in code and often within a single service (also called a controller).

When using an operator design pattern the user should only be required to describe the desired state of the application and resources. The operator implementation should make the necessary changes in the world so it will be in the desired state. The operator will also monitor the real state continuously and take actions to keep it healthy and in the same state (preventing drifts).

A general diagram of an operator will have software that can read the desired spec and can create and manage the resources that were described. 

![Operator Design Pattern](img/02_1_operator_pattern.png)

The Operator pattern consists of three components:

* The application or infrastructure that we want to manage in a declarative way.

> * Our domain specific knowledge that describes the state of the application in a declarative way.

Author: @Jenniferstrej: As discussed, we'd try to rewrite this in a clearer way ...

> * Our domain specific knowledge that describes the state of the application in a declarative way.

Reviewer 6: Written in the latest two suggestions https://github.com/cncf/sig-app-delivery/pull/97#pullrequestreview-626511754

Allowing for better validation and data structuring reduces the likelihood of small configuration errors and improves the ability of teams to self-serve. Enabling them to avoid having a deep or complete a knowledge of either the underlying orchestrator or the target application as would be traditionally required. This can include things like progressive defaults, where a few high-level settings are used to populate a best-practices-driven configuration file or adaptive configuration such as adjusting resource usage to match available hardware or expected load based on cluster size.

#### Operational Automation

> Along with custom resources, most operators include at least one custom controller. These controllers are daemons that run inside the orchestrator like any other, but connect to the underlying API and provide automation of common or repetitive tasks. This is the same way that orchestrators (like Kubernetes) are implemented, you may have seen kube-controller-manager or cloud-controller-manager mentioned in your journey so far. But as we saw with configuration, operators can extend and enhance orchestrators with higher-level automation such as deploying clustered software, providing automated backups and restores, or dynamic scaling based on load.
> 
> By putting these common operational tasks into code, we can ensure they will be repeatable, testable and upgradable in a standardized fashion. Keeping humans out of the loop on frequent tasks also ensures that steps won’t be missed or excluded and that different pieces of the task can’t drift out of sync with each other. As before, this allows for improved team autonomy by reducing the hours spent on boring-but-important upkeep tasks like application backups.
> 
> #### Domain Knowledge
> Similar to operational automation, we can write an operator to encode specialized domain knowledge about particular software or processes. A common example of this is application upgrades. While a simple stateless application might need nothing more than a Deployment’s rolling upgrade; databases and other stateful applications often require very specific steps in sequence to safely perform upgrades. This can be handled autonomously by the operator as it knows your current and requested versions and can run specialized upgrade code when needed. More generally, this can apply to anything a pre-cloud-native environment would use manual checklists for (effectively using the operator as an executable runbook).
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Along with custom resources, most operators include at least one custom controller. These controllers are daemons that run inside the orchestrator like any other, but connect to the underlying API and provide automation of common or repetitive tasks. This is the same way that orchestrators (like Kubernetes) are implemented, you may have seen kube-controller-manager or cloud-controller-manager mentioned in your journey so far. But as was demonstrated with configuration, operators can extend and enhance orchestrators with higher-level automation such as deploying clustered software, providing automated backups and restores, or dynamic scaling based on load.

By putting these common operational tasks into code, it can be ensured they will be repeatable, testable and upgradable in a standardized fashion. Keeping humans out of the loop on frequent tasks also ensures that steps won’t be missed or excluded and that different pieces of the task can’t drift out of sync with each other. As before, this allows for improved team autonomy by reducing the hours spent on boring-but-important upkeep tasks like application backups.

#### Domain Knowledge
Similar to operational automation, it can be written into an operator to encode specialized domain knowledge about particular software or processes. A common example of this is application upgrades. While a simple stateless application might need nothing more than a Deployment’s rolling upgrade; databases and other stateful applications often require very specific steps in sequence to safely perform upgrades. This can be handled autonomously by the operator as it knows your current and requested versions and can run specialized upgrade code when needed. More generally, this can apply to anything a pre-cloud-native environment would use manual checklists for (effectively using the operator as an executable runbook).
```

Remove first-person voice

An operator can monitor its application and react to errors with specific behaviour to resolve the error or escalate the issue if it can’t be automatically resolved. This can reduce MTTR (mean time to recovery) and also reduce operator fatigue from recurring issues.

### Operator components in Kubernetes

*“An operator is a Kubernetes controller that understands 2 domains: Kubernetes and something else. By combining knowledge of both domains, it can automate tasks that usually require a human operator that understands both domains”*
(Jimmy Zelinskie, https://github.com/kubeflow/tf-operator/issues/300#issuecomment-357527937)

> ![Operator Big Picture](img/02_2_operator.png)

Reviewer 7: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/9568421/112220358-771d8000-8c26-11eb-9315-e234f80a38ff.png)

not looking good with night mode on github

Reviewer 7: probably adding a background will fix it

Author: @OmerKahani will fix this ...

Reviewer 4: @AlexsJones fixed it in #101

![Operator Big Picture](img/02_2_operator.png)
Operators enable the extension of the Kubernetes API with operational knowledge. 
This is achieved by combining Kubernetes controllers and watched objects that describe the desired state. The controller can watch one or more objects and the objects can be either Kubernetes primitives such as Deployments, Services or things that reside outside of the cluster such as Virtual Machines or Databases. 

The controller will constantly compare the desired state with the current state using the reconciliation loop which ensures that the watched objects get transitioned to the desired state in a defined way.

> The operational (or domain-specific) knowledge is usually encapsulated in one or more Kubernetes custom resources which are defined by custom resource definitions.

Author: Will be handled in #100

> The operational (or domain-specific) knowledge is usually encapsulated in one or more Kubernetes custom resources which are defined by custom resource definitions.

Author: ```suggestion
The desired state is encapsulated in one or more Kubernetes custom resources and the controller contains the operational knowledge which is needed to get the objects (such as deployments, services) to their target state.
```

#### Kubernetes controllers
A Kubernetes Controller takes care of routine tasks to ensure the desired state expressed by a particular resource type matches the real-world state (current state,https://engineering.bitnami.com/articles/a-deep-dive-into-kubernetes-controllers.html, https://fntlnz.wtf/post/what-i-learnt-about-kubernetes-controller/). For instance, the Deployment controller takes care that the desired amount of pod replicas is running and a new pod spins up, when one pod is deleted or fails.

Technically, there is no difference between a typical controller and an operator. Often the difference referred to is the operational knowledge that is included in the operator. As a result, a controller which spins up a pod when a custom resource is created and the pod gets destroyed afterwards can be described as a simple controller. If the controller has additional operational knowledge like how to upgrade or remediate from errors, it is an operator.

#### Custom resources and custom resource definitions

> Custom resources are used to store and retrieve structured data in Kubernetes (https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/). 

Author: ```suggestion
Custom resources are used to store and retrieve structured data in Kubernetes beyond the default API (https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/). 
```

Author: @grzesuav : is this clearer in your opinion?

Reviewer 7: yes :)

> Custom resources are used to store and retrieve structured data in Kubernetes (https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/). 

Reviewer 7: `Custom resources are used to store and retrieve structured data in Kubernetes` maybe worth adding `..in addition to default Kubernetes API` - or something similar ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom resources are used to store and retrieve structured data in Kubernetes as an extension of the the default Kubernetes API  (https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/). 
```

> In the case of an operator, a custom resource contains the required state of the application or domain-specific knowledge but does not contain the implementation logic. Such information could be the version information of application components, but also enabled features of an application or information where backups of the application could be part of this. A custom resource definition (CRD) defines how such an object looks like, for example, which fields exist and how the CRD is named. Such a CRD can be scaffolded using tools (as the operator SDK) or be written by hand.

Author: ```suggestion
In the case of an operator, a custom resource contains the desired state of the application but does not contain the implementation logic. Such information could be the version information of application components, but also enabled features of an application or information where backups of the application could be part of this. A custom resource definition (CRD) defines how such an object looks like, for example, which fields exist and how the CRD is named. Such a CRD can be scaffolded using tools (as the operator SDK) or be written by hand.
```

> In the case of an operator, a custom resource contains the required state of the application or domain-specific knowledge but does not contain the implementation logic. Such information could be the version information of application components, but also enabled features of an application or information where backups of the application could be part of this. A custom resource definition (CRD) defines how such an object looks like, for example, which fields exist and how the CRD is named. Such a CRD can be scaffolded using tools (as the operator SDK) or be written by hand.

Reviewer 7: `a custom resource contains the required...` maybe `desired` ?

The following example illustrates, how such an custom resource instance definition could look like:

```
apiVersion: example-app.appdelivery.cncf.io/v1alpha1

>  kind: ExampleApp

Reviewer 7: wrong indent, either add two spaces to first line or remove from latter lines

Author: @thschue will do this

 metadata:
   name: appdelivery-example-app
 spec:
   appVersion: 0.0.1
   features:
     exampleFeature1: true
     exampleFeature2: false
   backup:
     enabled: true
     storageType: “s3”
     host: “my-backup.example.com”
     bucketName: “example-backup”
 status:
   currentVersion: 0.0.1
   url: https://myloadbalancer/exampleapp/
   authSecretName: appdelivery-example-app-auth
   backup:
     lastBackupTime: 12:00
```

> This example creates a custom resource with the name “appdelivery-example-app” of the kind “ExampleApp”.

Author: ```suggestion
This example describes a custom resource with the name “appdelivery-example-app” of the kind “ExampleApp”.
```

> This example creates a custom resource with the name “appdelivery-example-app” of the kind “ExampleApp”.

Reviewer 7: `This example creates` I would put `describes`  - as it will be created by i.e. `kubectl apply` command

Reviewer 7: hm, reading further, it has `status`, so it means it is object from running cluster, so maybe `represents` fit better?

An operator should also be able to recognize resources that were provintied before the installation process, and only take ownership of them for later use. In this case, the ownership process should be seamless and not cause downtime. The ownership process purpose is to enable easy migration of resources to the operator.

An Operator should report the version of the resources and their health status during the process.

#### Upgrade an application
An operator should be able to upgrade the version of the application/resources. The operator should know how to update the required dependencies and executing custom commands such as running a database migration.

An operator should monitor the update and rollback if there was a problem during the process.

An operator should report the version of the resources and their health status during the process. If there was an error, the version reported should be the version that is currently been used.

#### Backup

> This capability is for operators that manage data and ensure that the operator is able to create consistent backups. This backup should be done in a way that the user of the operator can be certain that it can be restored if data is lost or compromised. Furthermore, the status information provided should give insights about when the backup last ran and where it is located.

Author: We think that this sentence is important enough to keep it in the document. @Jenniferstrej will try to suggest something better ...

These capabilities should be transparent to the users the user should have the possibility to override such auto-configuration mechanisms if they want to do so. Furthermore, automatic reconfigurations should be well-documented in a way that the user could comprehend what is happening on the infrastructure.

#### Uninstalling / Disconnect
When deleting the declarative requested state (in most cases a custom resource), an operator should allow two behaviors:
- Uninstalling: An operator should be able to completely remove or delete every managed resource.
- Disconnecting: An operator should stop managing the provisioned resources.

Both processes should be applied to every resource that the operator directly provisioned.  
An operator should report any failure in the process in a declarative way (using the [status field](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/kubernetes-objects/#object-spec-and-status) for example).

## Security

> ![operator model](img/04_1_operator_model.png)

Reviewer: This diagram is very difficult to read, I suggest redrawing it in excalidraw.com

Reviewer 2: I agree with the sentiment, this hand drawn diagram is tough.

As an alternative to excalidraw.com, I've used draw.io a lot (which I love because you can check in the code for the image to GitHub as it's a text representation - as well as having a great VS Code extension - I don't work for Draw.io, just a happy user!)

Author: We will make this drawing a bit easier to read ...

separation from any loose or stolen RBAC in the subordinate resource’s
namespace, a dedicated namespace for the operator provides more
separation.

**Role-Based Access Controls** are available in modern releases of
Kubernetes. When granting an operator access to resources, the focus
should be on granting the most limited set of permissions needed
for the operator to perform its task. This means only grant
ClusterRoles if absolutely necessary, but granting specific permissions
for specific resources/namespaces. The 
[Using RBAC Authorization](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/)
chapter of the user guide covers this topic in detail. Operator
build kits such as the Operator SDK use general RBAC defaults that
developers may have not refined for their specific operator.
Permissions afforded by the service account identity outside the
cluster include federated and cross-cluster operators that have
permissions in other Kubernetes clusters. As operators are increasingly
used to manage off-cluster and cloud resources, cloud IAM integration
permissions should be configured to prevent cloud account takeover
from a compromised operator.

> One thing to note: A “land grab” of privileges - e.g requesting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_One thing to note_: A “land grab” of privileges - e.g requesting
```

components running in clustered or distributed environments are not
always well suited for this type of container-based infrastructure. They
still require human interaction when it comes to persistence, upgrades,
or high availability to remain in a stable state.

True, Kubernetes solves these issues in a novel way by creating and
managing custom applications using Operators. However, and here is the
first question: as a developer, do you really know how this type of
application works and interacts both internally and externally? How do
the day-to-day IT operations work? How is the application backed up
(including recovery)? What steps are necessary in case of failovers or
outages, are there any dependencies between the software components?

It is therefore strongly recommended that a comprehensive requirement
analysis is needed to determine the requirements or conditions of an
Operator. Requirement analysis is critical to the success or failure of
Operators. All requirements should be documented, measurable, testable,
traceable, related to identified requirements, and defined at a level of
detail sufficient for system design.

> Best practice:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Steps to build the right operator:
```

> 1.  Do not assume to know what is needed.

Reviewer: I am not sure this fits as the opener of best practice. 
There are circumstances an engineer with their colleagues might know exactly what is required. What is the point behind this statement?

Reviewer 8: Hi, thanks for your comment. and you are right, I struggled with that statement too. However, I decided to keep this statement as it is about Requirement Engineering (RE) rather than an Operator. Assumptions are reasonably believed to be true based on experience, e.g. lessons learned.  Engineers with a lot of experience can  make assumptions much easier, but engineers with less experience should therefore not make assumptions, but first use techniques and methods of RE to gain the necessary experience.

Reviewer 6: Would mind making the Requirement Engineering focus more specific in this statement? Just so it doesn't seem too random.

2.  Study existing documentation of your application, interview
    responsible system administrators and other stakeholders (if
    necessary), get a list of possible system check activities, Business
    and SLA-relevant KPI and compare them with existing incident
    reports or bug tracking lists.

3.  Describe a concrete scenario (e.g., application failover) in detail
    along the lines of "who does what, when, how, and why".

4.  Describe what an Operator needs to know to run the previous scenario
    independently, keeping the application in a stable and productive
    state.

### Custom or third-party Operator

> Now that we know that we need an Operator and what the requirements are,
> we can turn our attention to the question where do we get a Kubernetes
> Operator which meets best our requirements?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the situations where using an Operator have been made clear, the next part of the paper will focus on where Operator implementations are available and which best meets requirements.
```

I just felt this needed a statement rather than rhetorical questions.

## Bibliography

* Dobies, J., & Wood, J. (2020). Kubernetes Operators. O'Reilly.
* Ibryam, B. (2019). Kubernetes Patterns. O'Reilly.
* Operator Framework. (n.d.). Operator Capabilities. Operator Framework. Retrieved 11 2020, 24, from https://operatorframework.io/operator-capabilities/
* Philips, B. (2016, 03 16). Introducing Operators: Putting Operational Knowledge into Software. CoreOS Blog. Retrieved 11 24, 2020, from https://coreos.com/blog/introducing-operators.html
## Contributors

### Contributors
- Philippe Martin (github.com/feloy)
- Noah Kantrowitz (github.com/coderanger)
- John Kinsella (github.com/jlk)
- Roland Pellegrini (github.com/friendlydevops)

- Jennifer Strejevitch (github.com/Jenniferstrej)
- Omer Kahani (github.com/OmerKahani)
- Thomas Schuetz (github.com/thschue)

### Reviewers

**Add yourself if you reviewed the document**

> Alex Jones (github.com/AlexsJones)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Alex Jones (github.com/AlexsJones)
```

Was on the same line as heading

By using the operator pattern, the knowledge on how to adjust and maintain a resource is captured in code and often within a single service (also called a controller).

When using an operator design pattern the user should only be required to describe the desired state of the application and resources. The operator implementation should make the necessary changes in the world so it will be in the desired state. The operator will also monitor the real state continuously and take actions to keep it healthy and in the same state (preventing drifts).

A general diagram of an operator will have software that can read the desired spec and can create and manage the resources that were described.

![Operator Design Pattern](img/02_1_operator_pattern.png)

The Operator pattern consists of three components:

> * The application or infrastructure that we want to manage in a declarative way.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* The application or infrastructure that we want to manage.
```

> * Our domain specific knowledge that describes the state of the application in a declarative way.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* A domain specific language that enables the user to specify the desired state of the application in a declarative way.
```

These capabilities should be transparent to the users the user should have the possibility to override such auto-configuration mechanisms if they want to do so. Furthermore, automatic reconfigurations should be well-documented in a way that the user could comprehend what is happening on the infrastructure.

#### Uninstalling / Disconnect
When deleting the declarative requested state (in most cases a custom resource), an operator should allow two behaviors:
- Uninstalling: An operator should be able to completely remove or delete every managed resource.
- Disconnecting: An operator should stop managing the provisioned resources.

Both processes should be applied to every resource that the operator directly provisioned.  
An operator should report any failure in the process in a declarative way (using the [status field](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/kubernetes-objects/#object-spec-and-status) for example).

## Security
![operator model](img/04_1_operator_model.png)

> Operators are intended to manage their state and configuration via
> the Kubernetes API server using the Custom Resource Definition. The
> subordinate API resources they manage (often pods running stateful
> applications) also have their lifecycle and supporting RBAC, services,
> etc. managed via the Kubernetes API. In some cases the operator
> will also interact with the application’s API across the network.
> All of these routes offer potential to compromise the operator and
> its resources, and should be protected in line with best practices
> laid out below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operators are intended to manage their state and configuration via the Kubernetes API server using the Custom Resource Definition. The subordinate API resources they manage (often pods running stateful applications) also have their lifecycle and supporting RBAC, services, etc. managed via the Kubernetes API. In some cases, the operator will also interact with the application’s API across the network. All of these routes offer the potential to compromise the operator and its resources and should be protected in line with best practices laid out below.
```

### Operator Developer
Operator developers should be aware of the security risks an operator
introduces and document its secure use. While developing an operator
it's important to focus on key areas such as transparency and
documentation, operator scope, and vulnerability analysis.

#### Transparency and Documentation

> During development of an operator a developer should have a clear understanding
> of how it will work and interface within Kubernetes. As a developer shifts
> from development to publishing the operator, users should also
> have a clear understanding of what the operator does, and how.
> 
> You've written something you're proud of, but think of this from
> the end user's point of view: Should they trust source code from
> the internet, an operator to run with administrative access on their
> cluster which may be large and costly, or may be handling sensitive
> information?  Anything the developer can do to help a user come up
> to speed with their software, how it works, how it's secured, and
> what affects it might have on their cluster will make it easier for
> them to adopt the software.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the development of an operator, a developer should have a clear understanding of how it will work and interface within Kubernetes. As developers shift from development to publishing the operator, users should also have a clear understanding of what the operator does, and how.
You've written something you're proud of, but think of this from the end user's point of view: Should they trust source code from the internet, an operator to run with administrative access on their cluster which may be large and costly, or maybe handling sensitive information? Anything the developer can do to help a user come up to speed with their software, how it works, how it's secured, and what effects it might have on their cluster will make it easier for them to adopt the software.
```

stay in scope for compliance
* Documented RBAC scopes, threat model, communication ports, API
calls available
* Security reporting, disclosure, and incident response processes:
If someone finds a potential security issue, who should they contact
and what type of response should they expect?
* Logging and monitoring attachment through exposed endpoints, log
levels, or log aggregation.
* If the project has had security disclosures in the past, listing
these disclosures (and their CVE IDs) on a web page is a strong step
in building trust with users. Everyone will have security
issues at some point - how they are handled displays the maturity
of a project.

For further ideas around the security of the development process,
the reader may wish to review the CNCF Security SIG's [self-assessment
questionaire](https://github.com/cncf/sig-security/blob/master/assessments/guide/self-assessment.md).

#### Operator Scope

There are many use cases for operators and there is virtually no
limit in the scope of what an operator can be designed for. In order
to be clear about the secure nature of a specific operator, the
developer must include the communication involved with each scope.

> The general scopes which could be used are cluster wide, namespace,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The general scopes which could be used are cluster-wide, namespace,
```

and external.

**Cluster-wide operators** exist to execute custom resources across
a cluster no matter if those resources are living in another namespace

> or not. In order to secure this scope we must know the nature of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or not. In order to secure this scope, we must know the nature of
```

the communication, any APIs created, controllers and their

> responsibility, and application metric endpoints. This information,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
responsibility and application metric endpoints. This information,
```

recommended that one first downloads that file locally, review it,
and then run `kubectl create -f operator.yaml`.

To review the script ask the following questions:

* What is the purpose of this script?
* What resources are being created by the script? Is this script creating Roles and RoleBindings?
* What 3rd party sources will the script attempt to use? (e.g.
container images, other yaml files) How popular and well-maintained
are the git and docker image repositories? These might be signs of
a new project, abandoned software which is no longer receiving
security updates, or indicators of an unofficial repository with
malicious intent.
* What privileges does the script attempt to gain? Does the script
attempt to run container securityContexts with host sharing or
“privileged mode”?

**Advanced security controls**, such as SELinux, AppArmor, or seccomp
may be mandated by cluster policy. Open source operators are unlikely
to have configurations for these Linux security modules, but if
an organization is familiar with one of these control systems,
writing the appropriate security configuration for the operator
should not require significant overhead.

> **Operator configuration**: Ideally a project will be “secure by
> default” to increase the likelihood of a secure operator or application
> deployment. Insecure defaults require manual configuration to secure
> the environment. While it may seem like unnecessary work to learn
> configuration  parameters of a new operator, it is usually preferable
> manually adjusting the configuration and/or source code of an
> operator itself to reach the needed level of security.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Operator configuration**: Ideally a project will be “secure by default” to increase the likelihood of a secure operator or application deployment. Insecure defaults require manual configuration to secure the environment. While it may seem like unnecessary work to learn the configuration parameters of a new operator, it is usually preferable to manually adjusting the configuration and/or source code of an operator itself to reach the needed level of security.
```
